When
did you first meet Dr. Francis?
When he taught me a course in Veterinary Anatomy
when I was a junior in animal husbandry. That was in
the year 21-22.
He was a little different than the usual one.
He would have been a pretty good one for the stage, I
think. He did everything in pantomime. And he
could imitate a horse with a string halt to
perfection. He'd drag that leg across
the room. Or a lame horse. And he'd show how they
acted, but he was just a comic as far as a lecture.
Later, a number of years later, I heard a story that
Dr. Bowden, who was dean from 48 to 53,
When he was a senior student at Ohio State
University, that's where Dr. Francis graduated.
Dr. Francis graduated there in 87.
When he was a senior student, he was a class of 16,
and when he was a senior student, the dean at Ohio
State invited Dr. Francis to lecture to the
veterinary students. And he went up there for a
week to lecture. And each succeeding day, well,
they'd have business. And they'd get to growing
and growing and growing. They wanted to see that
little man, cute little man lecture. But he was a
good lecturer, but did so much in pantomime. He was
a good mimic.
But the dean of engineering heard him. and talked
him into staying over a whole week, mind you, and
lectured to the engineering students. And they
did the same thing, yes. What would he lecture to
them about? Well, just, I don't know, but it was
probably stories of one kind or another. He was
interested in paleontology. He had a wide
knowledge, but old citizenship and a little of
everything. After
he lost his hearing, he had influenza
or something. I left him with very hard of hearing,
and that was pretty... I don't know what year that
happened. It was before my time. But he would buy a
hearing device every time somebody had a new
hearing device. He'd buy it, give it away. He
wouldn't return it. He'd just give it away to
somebody else. He said it was convenient not to
hear.
But was a wonderful lip reader. I've been in his
office, and his secretary and I would be talking.
Dr. Francis would come down and sit across here,
and he'd look from one to the other. And we could
know that he was lip reading, so every time I'd
answer her, I'd turn to him. And he'd join in
conversation.
And he couldn't hear a word we were saying, but he
went right through it.
He did things his own way. For example, at
commencement,
every dean would get up and announce formally, of
course, by the power invested in me and so forth and
so forth, I present to you, the president, to the
following students and either civil engineering
or mechanical engineering or economics or
whatnot, agriculture.
And I remember Alan Ward finished, I think, the
only man in 28.
And we had commencement in Guyon Hall. And oh, it
was hot by that time in May, latter part of May. No
air conditioning.
And when his time, Dean Kyle, of course, would get
up in agriculture in his slow voice and take that
year to go through every word of that formality. By
the time veterinary medicine, that was the last
one. And he said, Ward, stand up. Come get it. That
was all. He didn't say by the power invested in me
and all that, he said. And Ward would make that long
walk down there, and of course by that time
everybody would applaud him, but everybody would
laugh. They were awake by that time. They always
stayed to hear Dr. Francis. And when Ty Hardy,
later he's retired from the Experiment Station at
Sonora, same thing, says, Hardy, stand up, come
and get it. and that was his way of ending the
commencement. But he got by with things like that.
It
was probably the best thing in the world he could
have done, but gave them a humorous
view part of it. What kind of relations did he as a
teacher have with his students? Oh, excellent. He
was a very compassionate man. He knew the quality
of the students. He didn't need to give final
examinations. How he evaluated students'
performances, I do not know. I never learned that.
I studied him and studied him. I helped him out with
some of his classes. I never knew how he could
evaluate a student. But when he came to the final
grades, they were right down the line. He didn't
give them an exam? He just gave a grade? Oh, yes.
He'd give us—
How would he quiz you on that?
Not orally, of course, because he couldn't hear,
but he'd give us occasionally bring a pad of Form B
in there. He said, OK, we're going to have an exam
today. In general discussion, describe all the
structures in here or there. And you had to know
something about it. You mean snap quizzes he'd
give you? Or would he tell you in advance? Oh, he
would tell us. No, I don't think he ever gave us a pop
quiz. He may have, but I don't recall. But
in the class of 36, there were two students who had
grades that mid-semester had grades reversed, I
think. How, I don't know. It was probably an error,
either in the registrar's office or either the
secretary may have transposed them.
But one was Charles Steger from Dallas, who was an A
student in everything. And we had some excellent
students in that class. I think there was 16
students in that class and about, I'd say 12 or 14
were straight A students. Oh, they were good
students. And
so one of the Boris came to me. He was later an
instructor in medicine surgery. He was a boy from
California.
He said, would you ask Dr. Francis if he hasn't made
an error in Charles Stegers? He was a buddy of
Charles. They worked in the lab together. And with
so-and-so and called this other boy's name from
Puerto Rico. I said, oh, no. I said, I'm not going to
bother him about grades. I said, those are not a
part of your final grades. I said, the error will
be, if it's an error, it'll be corrected. As a
matter of curiosity, the following week, I just
wrote him a note. I said, what kind of work is
Charles Digger? He said, oh, he's a top student. I
said, that boy's an A student, isn't he? And they
had a C posted for him. And I said, what do you think
about this man? I was thinking about this Puerto
Rican. He said, oh, he comes in late every time.
He's the first one to leave. And while he's there,
he doesn't do a damn thing. He had them already. He
knew them. And he had an A posted. Probably the only
A he ever had while he was in school.
by the end of the semester, why he had the grades, as
I should have been. But I wasn't going to bother
him. It wasn't my part to straighten things out.
But that was one little thing, things like that
that
I enjoyed being with him. He had a knack of
teaching. Do you think he enjoyed teaching? Oh,
yes, very much so. And he had a sharp wit.
In fact,
I remember two men who, oh, in the last few years
said, do you ever watch, that was when Arthur
Fiedler was at his top, that was about six or eight
years ago, If I ever watched the Boston Pops
Orchestra, I said, yes. He says, who does Arthur
Fiedler remind you of? I said, Dr. Francis. He
said, yes, that's exactly. His hair, his white
hair, the way he walked, sharp steps. Of course,
Fiedler in his last year, he was shuffling a little
bit more. And
his mannerisms. or right down the line in his
general appearance. He looked very much that
mustache, appearance very similar to Dr.
Francis. But, well,
he was a great man. I
remember, pardon me. He was,
had a great interest in paleontology. In fact, he
had a pretty good museum down here at one time. And
collected bones, people would send specimens in
for him or tell him about the gravel pit up around
Waco or down around close to Sealy or down close to
Houston. And he'd go and dig them up. And he had some
big dinosaur bones and stuff like that, and teeth.
And we'd go down after every, when the Brazos River
would get out of bounds or have a flood, after every
flood, we'd go down. And I went with him on a number
of trips. He'd always go in his collection. and put
about, oh, a half a dozen, depending on how many
would go with us. I'd use my car, and
we'd carry several, and he'd put these in his
pocket. When he'd get down there, he'd walk ahead.
We'd be busy with something. He'd give us
something to look at. He'd go down and scatter
these horse teeth.
from his collection of prehistoric horse.
So he come back and everybody found something.
Well, you do pull mischief like that. So
I went one weekend from Friday until Sunday. We
spent in Houston. Somebody had written him a
letter about a specimen
down in the bio somewhere that they had found. But
he wanted to go down there and look at it. And I took
him down there in my car, and we stayed at the old
McAtee Hotel right across from the Grand Central
Station Railroad, both gone now.
But after we checked in, we went up to an
8th
Friday evening. We ate at the Sanger Center Hotel
there on Main Street, the corner of Main and I don't
know whether that's Dallas or Walker. It's right
across. The Sanger Center now is the Marr Hotel.
The Marr extends from from Maine to, or the street
to west of that, I've forgotten what the name of it
is. But right across the street from Foley's,
right north of Foley's, that's the Lamar Hotel.
Well, right on the corner of Maine, standing back
about half the block, was the San Jacinto Hotel,
and that was a favorite meeting place for people
who'd go down and shop from around this community.
And so we ate supper there, and so He didn't hear
what I was ordering. He was a ham and egger. And he
came. He had ham and eggs. And I had a stuffed crab.
And he looked over there at mine. And he says,
Burns? He said, I want to get home.
And he says, I hope you don't get sick on that. He
said, we're planning to stay till Sunday.
You know, people leave home, they start eating
things that they're not accustomed to eating. And
he says, it's wrong. They ought to eat pretty much
safe things that they eat at home. And he says,
there you are eating, of all things, a shellfish, a
stuffed crab. And he says, this is Friday night. He
says, you know what they've been doing here at the
Santa Center since Monday morning? They've been
saving table scraps to stuff that crab
you're eating. Well, for breakfast, of course, I
ordered bacon and eggs, ham and eggs. And then for
lunch, I ate ham and eggs the rest of the time. And he
says, you know, you're getting smart.
But we went to... The old Metropolitan Theater, it
was brand new then, and it was one of the first
theaters that had that organ, you know, that was
hydraulic. And so
the picture show was, back in those days, B.B.
Daniels was the reigning, probably the female
actress at that time, the top one. But she was in a
polo, playing polo, and it was in South America,
I've forgotten the picture, and she was riding
this polo pony, and her left leg slipped through
the stove, and then she was hanging on to the horn,
to the saddle. And Dr. Francis got up out of there,
see, and he, and everybody around there got to
yelling at him, laughing at him, see, a peculiar
little fellow. And he rode every step until she was
safe. Somebody stopped that horse. Well, right in
the middle of the picture show, we were sitting
downstairs, about a third from the front and the
center. Very prominent. Every way you could see
were people up in the balconies and back hours. And
the lights went out. And...
Immediately, Dr. Francis reached in his coat
pocket and struck a match and lit this candle. And
that was after this trick of this photo match. And
the people got to laughing at him. He says, Burns,
people panic in the complete darkness. And it was
completely dark. He says, people panic. And he
said, all they need to see is a little ray of light.
And
all of us were laughing at him. It was a show. And
then we got home. He says, you know, I'll tell you
something about that candle. He said, I was out in
West Texas. He used to travel. When he came here in
88, Of course, he had very little teaching, taught
agriculture to students, but he did a lot of
research and did a lot of extension work and
traveled all over the state. And he was out in West
Texas, and he said, that was the day before they'd
have a toilet in each room. And he says, the toilet
would be down by one on each floor. And he said, way
down at the end of the hall. And he says, during the
night I got up as usual and said, I walked down there
and said, I thought I counted rooms going down
there so I could get my way back. They were dark. And
he says, I counted rooms and I stopped a little bit
too soon and I opened the door and a woman screamed.
And he says, ever since then I've carried a candle
with me. He says, I'll never leave home without a
candle.
He had a lot of fun about him.
Do you think he liked being the dean? Well, from the
time I knew him, he really didn't. Dr. Marsteller
took care of the dean's duties as far as
registration and stuff like that.
He was in demand as a lecturer, but he had stopped
that by the time I got started taking veterinary
medicine. That was back in the 16 when he went up
there to lecture. I guess he got tired of it or
something. He couldn't hear. But he had stopped
it. But he would
like to go to . He never did drive a car. Why not? They
were on the Buick. Mrs. Francis drove them all, any
place he wanted to go. But he would never miss a
Shirley Temple show. Really? Yeah, he'd go to
picture shows with her. But another
thing I remember about him, he picked up the
newspaper one day, and I think he was taking Dallas
News, and he said, look there. on the sports page.
He says,
the Yanks slaughtered the Indians.
He said, now what would a foreign student over here
from the East, and we still had foreign students,
not as many as we have now. But you did have some,
huh? Oh, yes. And he says, what would a foreign
student think about? Mainly South America or
Mexico. What would a foreign student How could he
read those lines on the page? Headlines, you know,
are the Tigers,
Tigers slaughter the Indians, or something like
that, you know, devour the Indians. Typical sport
page, and captioned, and headlines. He says, I
don't know how they read those things. He said, He
had the same trouble when he went to Germany. He
stayed in Germany for a while, Berlin, and he said
he had some of that trouble. What kind? I mean, how
did he get along with the Germans? Well, I don't
know, but as far as trying to read newspapers and
things like that, no. He went over on the He
inducted Conaway, who was later dean of the
veterinary school at Missouri. But see, he had
sent some cattle, a load of cattle up there to
Missouri to work on this tick fever problem. And,
oh, that was probably in the 90s, about that time. I
know the same, the dipping vat. Sure. First
dipping vat that... It was built in this part of the
country. I think he built it in 96. He copied it from
the King Ranch. I don't know what the King Ranch was
doing with theirs. They were using it for a
different purpose. But later, of course, they got
in forced dipping over the state for these cattle.
But it was all more or less from scratch research
work then.
So he and Dr. Conaway went to Europe. see if they
could pick up anything. But the life history, the
life cycle was done right here at the Experiment
Station by Cooper Curtis, who was in the
Veterinary Science Department under Dr.
Francis. So
unless it was to study the organism, but he and Dr.
Conway visit the University of Berlin. I think
they were in Austria, but mainly the University of
Berlin. What do you think Dr. Francis' aim for the
vet school was, his goal?
I don't know. When he,
he had a pretty hard time. The first he started off
with a 14 by 16 room in the old main building which
was destroyed by fire in 1912.
And that was his office, classroom, and
laboratory, 14 by 16. And it was on the first floor
of the old, well that main building was right where
the academic building, the one with the dome on it.
And 14 by 16, and the following year they gave him
another room.
And for a laboratory, they built him a frame
building down pretty close to where the ag
building is now, the old ag building.
I think 18 by 30 feet, and that's where he had lab.
And, but... Shortly after that, they were doing
dissecting work
in the old natatorium, which they used to have a
bathhouse. The students, instead of having
bathing facilities and a dormitory, they used
that as a bathhouse down there. It was between what
is now Francis Hall, where the business is. I don't
know.
Between that and the chemistry building. Facing,
well, it would be right on that street, right
west of the chemistry building and Francis Hall.
And between that and the Harrington building over
there. Of course, that is a dead end now. It's a
library.
But did he ever talk to you about his aim or his goal?
Well, he mentioned back in 33 when they were
tearing down the old veterinary hospital right
across the street from the lag building and that
later was where the engineering building was
built. He just mentioned that day that
about he says it's on the go now and he says
there should be some marked improvements when if
and when somebody
can produce
I don't recall his exact words, but
when they can do something to justify the increase
in growth. But
oh my, I don't know whether you could visualize
what it's grown into though. I don't think anybody
could do that.
Because in the 60s, when things really took off,
that's where the greatest growth has occurred.
But that's beyond, I think, anybody's
expectations. And then this new building is, oh, I
don't know. It started off with, I think, about a $9
million appropriation for this new clinic
building, which is supposed to be operated
by
May or June 81, I believe. They started, broke
ground on it. What's going up very quickly now?
Last year, I think in,
yeah, broke ground in September 79.
So it's going to take two years. Why did you say that
he was the greatest, about the greatest man that
you've ever known? Well, of his accomplishments
and his compassion and
his ability, his keenness, able to do research
work and teaching and just general viewpoints on
life. And
he never called a roll, and I doubt if any student
ever cut his classes.
But he had a wonderful way, uncanny way, of
evaluating people.